### Unsupervised Learning: Segmentation and Clustering of US Used Car Sales Data 

#### Author: Pletcher, Dominic

### ABSTRACT 

This research study employs unsupervised machine learning techniques to analyze a substantial dataset of US car sales from 2021. The dataset is carefully preprocessed, resulting in a refined set of 17 key parameters. A 10% subsample of the data is used for segmentation and clustering, utilizing various clustering algorithms and dimensionality reduction techniques. The t-SNE reduced MiniBatch K-Means algorithm demonstrates the most promising results, producing a Silhouette score of 0.39, indicating effective data segmentation. The model identifies three distinct clusters, revealing insights into the US car market segments based on year, price, odometer, and condition. However, due to computational limitations, the full dataset remains unexplored.

This study contributes to understanding US car sales data, particularly in the context of used cars' condition and values, enabling strategic decision-making in the automotive industry. It highlights the potential of unsupervised learning methods in deriving valuable insights from large-scale datasets and paves the way for future research in this area. The segmented clusters generated by the unsupervised learning algorithm can enhance future prediction and classification models, showcasing the significance of this approach.

### RESEARCH QUESTION

Can the application of unsupervised machine learning techniques identify distinct patterns or trends in the pricing and demand of various types of used cars in the 2021 market?

### DATASET LINK

This is a dataset accessed from Kaggle. This dataset was not created for this project, but simply accessed publicly to perform such project. All credit for dataset creation goes to the original creator. The link to the dataset is below: 

https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/austinreese/craigslist-carstrucks-data

### DATASET DESCRIPTION

Creator: Austin Reese

This dataset contains over 400,000 samples of used car sales within the US in 2021. There are a variety of columns that detail information on each sale such as price, model, year and condition, amongst others. The creator collected the data via web scraping of Craigslist databases.

There are various ways to access the original dataset. The code below is the API command used in Jupyter Notebook to download the dataset. 

kaggle datasets download -d austinreese/craigslist-carstrucks-data

### RESULTS AND CONCLUSION

This research study successfully applied a range of unsupervised machine learning techniques to a substantial dataset of US car sales from 2021. Through meticulous data preprocessing, we refined the dataset to 17 salient parameters and proceeded with the segmentation and clustering of a 10% subsample. The experiments employed various clustering algorithms and dimensionality reduction techniques, with the t-SNE reduced MiniBatch K-Means algorithm yielding the most promising results. The model produced a Silhouette score of 0.39, indicative of effective data segmentation. Further, the optimal number of data clusters was 3, providing a nuanced understanding of the US car market segments.

The segments (clusters) established by the model produced different mean results for year, price, odometer, and condition. All four of these features proved to be important to the model, amongst others. However, due to computational limitations, the application of the model to the full dataset is a matter for future exploration.

This study significantly contributes to the understanding of US car sales data, which can be leveraged to shape strategic decisions in the automotive industry, specifically the condition and values of used cars. The research underscores the potential of unsupervised learning methods in deriving meaningful insights from large-scale datasets, pointing the way for future research to continue advancing this promising line of inquiry. In particular, the segmentated clusters generated by the unsupervised learning algorithm and added into the dataframe has the potential to enhance future models of prediction and classification.
